# ADA-Essay-Qs
**ADA Application Essay Questions**  
1. _Why are you interested in programming? What have you done to expose yourself to programming so far?_

Organizations I’ve worked for and admire provide direct services for indigent populations and perform highly sensitive work. Having a background in social work, public interest law, and governmental regulation I want to help bridge the gap in private – public partnerships by integrating and leveraging technology as the tool for social justice. 
The lack of technology and data systems for organizations and nonprofits that assist low-income individuals and families is a structural and financial barrier that I know all too well. However, what really bothers me about working in various organizations and initiatives the lack of security, privacy, and overall data management that can (and have) compromised a client, case, financial information, and even the organization itself.

The way I see it, coding is not just a framework or structural component to enable actions or interfaces. I think its one of the most unexplored frontiers in communication and should be humanized through design, purpose, and its effectiveness to solve problems. Whether those problems are operational, or complex such as a cause, policy, or law I want to use coding to track, measure, influence the reality I want to be able to learn and provide that knowledge whether it is through a software tool, an application, or data management for organizations and local governments to integrate. 

I have taken a few introduction courses in HTML and CSS at general assembly in downtown Seattle, and am currently reading The Joy of PHP by Alan Forbes and other online material on courser.com about the different languages in coding. Also, in my previous project management role at Amazon, I gain some experience in regexp. I created “rules” or scripts using various languages to search amazon websites across all seven marketplaces and take down restricted and illegal products. My searches would include a set of words, distance, and a second set using the same logic to exclude and drop items that were otherwise ok for sale. Once the rule was launched, I evaluated the data that returned and learned basic SQL to retrieve information about the captured products for business reporting. This by far, was one of my favorite parts of the job as I could see the impact (financial and legal) of how coding was used to protect consumers from dangerous products, and comply with the federal law. 


2. _If you are accepted into our program, where do you see your career in 5 years?_  

I see myself as a technology consultant, programmer, and legal contact between high tech companies working with local governments, specifically the city of Seattle. I love Seattle and plan to make my life and start a new career here. Seattle being at the forefront of medical research, clean tech innovation, and progressive policies in state and local government I want to be a leader and part of the group of professionals that will push the city to our potential.
I am a project manager at heart, and whether that is in case management in a non-profit or in project management for a private company I find myself able to code switch between different groups of people and helping them understand their needs while simultaneously providing solutions to the problems they are trying to address. Learning to code and becoming a programmer through ADA will enable that vision. I don’t see myself as solely working for a tech company, I see myself as a professional in the community that has both the contextual understanding of a need or problem while having the technical expertise to make that happen. 


3. _After reading Ada's Vision, Mission and Inclusivity Statement, how will you contribute to Ada's vision for an inclusive and diverse community?_ 

Aside me being a proud member of a continuously underrepresented group, I feel that there is also extensive diversity in my perspective and intention to become a professional with technical expertise in programming. This diversity in perspective I think will bring more to the table to the upcoming cohort at ADA than even my cultural background.   

My perspective on becoming a programmer to best enable the law itself and provide community change and social justice is different than most people who are generally attracted to tech because of its large market demand and pay. I am first generation Mexican-American, who is college-educated, multi-lingual, and somehow landed in a semi-tech role not because of a tech background, but because of my linguistic and managerial skills. Already I feel that even within entry level and mid-level management in technology companies there is a lack of diversity in perspective that is parallel to the lack of cultural and gender diversity. Women, people of color, and non-binary gender individuals have multiple identities that will reflect in their work, communication style, and general demands within the work place. This is crucial in technology where every day individuals are seeking more human centered design, and tailoring solutions the problems of diverse communities and businesses.   

My unique upbringing across three countries and personal opportunities that led me to travel, study, and work in places like Argentina, Cambodia, Iran, Mexico, and Brazil contribute to the way I formulate thinking patterns and big picture analysis. Given my background as a child of immigrants, growing up in poverty in a dusty conservative west Texas town and becoming a student of an ADA cohort is in some way a step further than what ADA is traditionally attempted to target in order to increase diversity in the tech industry. My participation is in ADA is an exemplification of the diversity within underrepresented groups in both thought, background, intention, culture, and ambition to pursue technology as a lifetime career and not just a skill set.  

4. _Tell us about a time you made a mistake that you learned a lot from. If you encountered the situation again, what would you do differently?_  

In my role as case manager at the Legal aid Society of Hawaii I was tasked with assisting elders and mentally handicapped individuals that had been denied disability benefits. It was my job to prepare the appeals case by gathering medical evidence and testimony about an individual’s past and present medical conditions and make the best case possible for him or her to receive the financial assistance they needed. Unfortunately, what I did not thoroughly understand the importance of the testimony of the individual and solely focused on the conditions that we had medical proof of or other charted information. I basically didn’t listen to what they had to say as much as what they had to provide me to say on their behalf.  

This was detrimental to so many individuals not just because their appeals were being denied, but because it would have allowed me to prompt them to seek further medical attention and care that would have otherwise changed the decision of the social security office. What I learned in this entire appeals process is often the testimony of an individual was equal to that of a formal diagnosis of a doctor and I was omitting an integral part of that appeal. Fortunately in this situation I was able to amend and be successful for these individuals to receive the care and financial assistance deserved to them, however it taught me a critical lesson in looking at what seems to be an easy problem from a birds eye view, and being more open and receptive to all of the information available to confront a problem. Being careful not to be dismissive of important facts and essentially made me a better manager by really learning to listen and see the bigger picture. 
